main street press conference I'm pleased
to be joined today by dr. Jenny Harris
let me start by updating you on the
latest information from the government's
Cobra data file as of today three
million three hundred and forty-eight
thousand five hundred and seven tests
for korone virus have now been carried
out in the UK including one hundred and
sixteen thousand five hundred and eighty
five tests yesterday two hundred and
fifty seven thousand one hundred and
fifty-four people have tested positive
that's an increase of two thousand nine
hundred and fifty-nine cases since
yesterday nine thousand three hundred
and thirty-one people are currently in
hospital with coronavirus down eleven
percent since last week and tragically
36 thousand six hundred and seventy five
people have now died that's an increase
of two hundred and eighty two fatalities
since yesterday and that's across all
settings this is not just a list of
Statistics of course but a devastating
reminder of the cruelty of coronavirus
our thoughts are with friends and
families of the victims as we start to
relax the restrictions we must plan our
route to recovery allowing people to
resume their lives where possible
getting businesses up and running again
and building beyond coronavirus in the
short term will bring will need to bring
back more public transport to keep
families safe
that process has already begun
rail and tube services increased at the
beginning of this week and the ramped up
more next month and to ensure that more
buses trans and light rail networks
return to service today I can announce
new investment of two hundred and eighty
three million pounds to start moving
back to a full timetable however I do
want to stress this funding does not
mean we can go back to using public
transport whenever we like remember
those who can should still work from
home those who can should still avoid
all public transport even a fully
restored service will only be capable of
carrying at best one-fifth of the normal
capacity once social distancing is taken
into account so only if you need to
travel and you can't cycle or walk or
drive should you take a bus tram or
train but please avoid the rush hour
we're managing the transport network to
make it as safe as possible this week we
saw the deployment of nearly three and a
half thousand British Transport Police
Network Rail and Transport for London
employees these marshals worked with the
public to prevent services from becoming
overcrowded from June 1st at the
earliest as we move to phase 2 of the
unlock will start to deploy twice as
many marshals with the assistance of
groups like the charity volunteering
matters these journey makers will help
provide reassurance advice and friendly
assistance to commuters the last time we
did this at the 2012 Olympics it was a
great success and while these are
altogether more serious times if we show
the same public spirited concern for one
another it will go a long way towards
helping transport and passengers cope as
I've said it's essential we stagger our
journeys and avoid the rush hour that's
why at a recent roundtable we asked the
tech sector to come up with innovative
proposals to help passengers avoid
congestion one good example is passenger
connect from Birmingham startup zip
about a personalized information service
which tells rail users how disruption
and crowding may affect their journey
while providing alternatives and helping
people to maintain social distancing the
service has been successfully piloted
over the past 12 months and it will be
rolled out soon
we're not just stealing with the immense
challenges of the present were building
for the future two transports not just
about how he get from place to place it
also shapes the places for good or bad
towns cities and whole nations we now
have an opportunity to use the power of
transport to improve long-standing
national weaknesses and create something
better
the UK's unbalanced economy is one such
weakness our mission is to level up
Britain the kovat outbreak must be the
catalyst to get it done
leveling up and speeding up so while
roads and railways are less busy we're
accelerating vital projects take the
north for example this bank holiday
weekend we're carrying out vital work to
fix Leeds Station continuing to build a
new platform installing new points and
switches and improving the track to
Wakefield just part of 490 separate
engineering projects happening around
the country this bank holiday weekend
work that would normally take months of
weekend closures much quicker on these
quieter railways and we're getting on
with plans to reverse some of the
so-called beaching rail cuts to dr.
beaching wrote a report back in the
1960s which led to the closure of one
third of our railway network 2363
stations 5,000 miles of track identified
for closure many of the places removed
from the map never recovered that report
was perhaps the origin of the left
behind town but were working to reverse
beaching the process has already started
in Blyth in the Northeast and fleetwood
in the northwest I visited in January
and also took the opportunity to visit
Horton Peter Lee to see the station
building work there used to be a train
station 200 yards away but it was closed
in the town cut off by the Beeching axe
this new station will connect a
community of over 50,000 people
improving their quality of life and
today the next 10 schemes to benefit are
announced its development funding but if
they stack up then we're going to build
them fast amongst the many schemes is
the reinstatement of the Ivanhoe line in
these Midlands from Leicester to Burton
Barr Colville and Ashby and branch lines
on the Isle of Wight and a new station
at Wellington in sunset but no matter
how great we make the railways of the
future millions will still rely on the
car that's why today I'm publishing the
preferred route to complete the dual
carriageway on the a 66 from Scotch
corner to Penrith the first new all dual
carriageway across the Pennines in 50
years this is a 1 billion pound program
that will transform the capacity by
upgrading junctions and widening the
road these road and rail schemes will be
the first of many binding our country
together connecting people with jobs but
it isn't just the balance between
regions that we need to reshape it's
hard to see millions who until a few
weeks ago commuted by train into
Manchester London Birmingham every day
will immediately go back to the same old
ways so we have to reshape our towns and
cities to the Prime Minister once said
city is aware inspiration and innovation
happens because people can bump into
each other spark off one another compete
collaborate invent and innovate that's
when we get the explosion or flash of
creativity and innovation and yet with
social distancing it makes all that
rather more difficult so we have to find
new ways of making it happen
therefore as conditions allow and not
until July we'll be looking to support
creative ways for businesses to reopen
whilst maintaining social distancing we
know restaurants and bars will want to
start trading again and we'll work with
them so we can enjoy an outdoor summer
in a safe and
responsible environment for those who
live too far cycle and walk and must
drive to major conurbations
will repurpose parking in places just
outside town centers so people can park
on the outskirts and finish their
journeys on foot or bike or even a
scooter
our aim with these measures is not
merely to get through the lifting of
restrictions and then return to how
things were but to come out of this
recovery stronger by permanently
changing the way we use transport take
the bike for example previously we
announced the introduction of a scheme
to help bring bicycles back into a
roadworthy condition relieving the
pressure on public transport and
improving the nation's health today I
can provide the detail of the new
50-pound bycel bicycle maintenance
voucher available from next month the
scheme will help up to half a million
people drag bikes out of retirement
speeding up the cycling revolution
helping individuals become fitter and
healthier and reducing air pollution
which remains a hidden killer clean air
should be as big a priority for us in
the 21st century as clean water whilst
of the Victorians in the 19th the
measures discussed today will help more
passengers use trains buses and trams
safely more commuters to take up active
travel and more people to benefit from
infrastructure improvements in the
northern powerhouse and across the
country they gave us all an opportunity
to harness the power of transport not
just to help us return to the lives in
the post kovat world but to make our
economy more resilient our population
healthier and to change our nation for
the better
I'd like to turn now to dr. Jenny Harris
will take us through the slides for
today thank you first slide please so
we're going to have our usual look
through some of the data that we are
collecting going forward through the
pandemic
and get some insights as to how the
population is behaving but most
importantly what is happening to the
disease so on the first slide on the
left you can see the insights which are
gathered from google mobility data it
won't cover everybody on all user groups
but it gives a good indication of what
the population is doing and how they're
moving around and what we can see is a
very significant drop in usage to
workplaces to transit stations and
retail and recreation which has been
largely maintained through the pandemic
clearly in the middle we can see grocery
and pharmacy people needing to use that
and then the blue line in the middle
with people starting to use parks more
in line with the national guidance the
only thing I would say there is that if
people are using parks which is good for
mental health or physical activity
please do remember to maintain social
distancing while using them so staying 2
meters away from people outside your
household and just meeting with one
other person on the right-hand side you
can see an ons opinions and lifestyle
survey data so both of these sets of
data go back to about a week ago and we
can see that a significantly larger
number of people 41% of the property of
employed adults are working from home
and that's compared to just around 12%
last year and and we know that 86% of
adults have left their home we know that
80% of those are for basic necessities
and around 71% for exercise for a run
for a walk or a cycle again all in
accordance with national guidance which
we would encourage next slide please so
this is the slide showing the current
situation with testing and new cases so
on the left-hand side you can see the
data in relation to testing and the top
number there 116,000 585 represents all
the tests in all the different systems
that have been completed or taken all
center whether it be through loud
in hospitals wherever it may be up until
9 o'clock on the 23rd of May which
brings the national total now to well
over three three million three hundred
and forty-eight thousand and from that
testing we can see that we've got two
thousand nine hundred and fifty nine new
confirmed cases as of this morning and
that brings our UK total to two hundred
and fifty-seven thousand one hundred and
fifty-four and the graphs on the right
clearly show this I think the important
thing is that there is a trend upwards
in our daily testing which we expect to
continue as track and trace comes in it
varies a little bit over weekends but
generally the trend is up but very
encouragingly despite the increased
upward trend in testing we are
maintaining a downward trend in new
confirmed cases next nightly so this guy
slide gives a picture of both the
activity in our hospitals and also of
some of the important life-saving
equipment which is one of the issues we
were very concerned about at the start
of the pandemic so on the right we can
see that there's been a steady but
continuing slow downward trend in new
daily admissions to hospitals in England
from Kovac 19 right down from a peak
which reached over 3,000 around the
first week of April and that translates
in numbers to 675 estimated emissions on
the 21st of May
again down from 736 on the 14th of May
and then on the bottom part of the slide
on the right-hand graph right across all
the UK countries we can see that the
demand for mechanical ventilator beds
was high again just after that peak
because people went through significant
illness about the middle of April and
that's now come down in all countries
and when we look over at the statistics
on the left-hand side we can see that
12% of the mechanical ventilator beds
are occupied with kovat 19 patients so
significant
city which was never breached and in
fact his down by five percent on the
week before next time so when we look at
number of people in hospital with Kovac
nineteen nine hundred nine thousand
three hundred and thirty-one people in
hospital now and that stand by over a
thousand from this time last week and we
can see in the slides
despite the varying shapes across the
different UK countries and regions that
this is a downward trend in all areas it
varies different different places have
had different peaks and at very slightly
different times but generally right
across the UK the number of cases is
coming down next Knightley's and then
finally and sadly over the last 24 hours
we have had 282 reported deaths which
have been confirmed with a positive test
which brings our total to thirty six
thousand six hundred and seventy five
however on the only positive note from
that number is that we can see that the
the deaths are starting continuously to
come down the bar chart here always
depicts a little bit of a reporting
change over the weekend periods but the
rolling average so we're we're looking
to see on average what is happening that
is continuing to come down and we will
be looking to expect that to come down
further Jenny thank you very much indeed
we're going to turn now to questions we
can start with questions from the public
it's worth mentioning we don't know the
questions they're going to be asked
they're picked by an independent polling
company and we'll turn first of all to
Gordon from Gospels how is the
government going to prevent travelers
staying in the Irish Republic at the end
of their holidays to bypass the UK's 14
day quarantine
thank you very much Gordon well I think
the the point that people may not be
aware of is that Island has a
a travel ban effectively as well so they
also at the moment have quarantine in
place so it is you know the case that
that may change in the future of course
will keep our system under review in the
future but for the time being whether
somebody travels to Dublin or somebody
travels to London the same essential
quarantine would would apply can I turn
to Sarah from Newbury and I think this
as a text for me to read how is the sari
you currently test people with symptoms
from the age of five over will there be
some guarantee that this will be
extended to under fives once early years
settings are opened if not how are you
supposed to justify to our staff members
and the wider community that it's safe
to open and it's probably one for you
Jenny thank you yes so it's very
important that when we are doing tests
we're doing tests which we know will
give true true answers have high
sensitivity and high specificity and so
we're always looking to find new tests
going forward for the time being this is
for over five - most of the children
going back will be around this age
clearly often we have slightly different
ways of approaching medicines for
example or testing with young children
because it's very important that the
tests the results all the medicines and
treatments are calibrated to growing
children if it's medicine or are
interpreted correctly for a small child
and of course you're right in the sense
we are still learning about some of the
disease and children but what we do know
is that children rarely become very ill
with this and there is a suggestion and
lots of data I think in the public
domain now where we're getting a signal
that the transmission from children is
also potentially reduced so for children
over five it will be ready for schools
to use and for their families as well
and for the teachers for children under
five obviously that we will progress
that going forward Jenny thanks very
much indeed we'll turn now to Jonas and
in what
of the BBC I suppose it's quite
appropriate we've got new transport
circuitry with us today because I was
hoping you and indeed dr. Harris could
clarify some of the guidance around
travelling during lockdown it seemed to
me that the guidance was pretty clear
actually if you have symptoms is self
isolated for seven days and the rest of
your household stays at home for 14 days
but is the advice now to parents that if
you don't have your own extended family
nearby even when you are ill with Kovac
symptoms you are allowed to leave your
home travel many miles across the
country an isolate closer to your
extended family and a specific question
to you mr. sharps did the Prime Minister
know that his adviser Dominic Cummings
had travelled 250 miles or more during
lockdown did he approve this thanks very
much did you mean the first question to
Jenny um I think the views of both of
you actually but certainly a value
Jenny's advice specifically on whether
pins who are ill can leave their own to
go closer to their extended family so
the the scientific of medical advice
behind the self isolation is obviously
to take people who are symptomatic out
of the public domain and anybody who may
be likely to develop that and households
tend to have the same exposures so we
know there's a greater risk so as you
say the advice is you self isolate at
home your family self isolate with you
and that's very clear I think built into
that guidance along with all of our
other guidance so for example for
elderly people or those who are
clinically extremely vulnerable and are
advised to stay at home and they have
accepted and and wanted to take forward
that advice there is always an element
which says safeguarding so we don't want
an elderly person sitting at home
without their medication because they
feel they can't come out if there is a
safeguarding issue and a child for
example is significantly unwell and has
no support that is equally another issue
but those are the interpretation that's
the clinical advice around that there's
always a safeguarding clause in all of
the advice whether it be
or for clinically extremely vulnerable
the the interpretation of that advice is
probably for others and then you're
asking if the Prime Minister knew look
the important thing is that everyone
remains in in the same place whilst
there whilst they're locked down which
is Zach what happened in I think the
case you're referring to with mr.
Cummings so the Prime Minister will have
known he was staying put and he didn't
come out again until he was feeling
better I'll just come back to you he did
travel 250 miles from his London home
did you not again to you and dr. house
you seem to be very clear about when
people can leave their own doctor iris
that is for example if they're seeking a
you know food medical supplies caring
for the vulnerable let me give you one
specific example if someone is ill and
the other parent is not about time
showing symptoms and have a young child
should they leave their home when ill to
go to another home 250 miles away is
that in line with the guidance with so
yeah I can go first I'll go first
in the guidance says if you're living
with children keep following this advice
to the best of your ability however
however we are aware that not all these
measures will be possible depending
therefore on circumstances I'm adding
those last few words in other words if
you are in a position where you've got a
young child in this case four years old
and uni are worried about the welfare of
that child and your ability to throw
around them the wider network of support
then you're clearly being somewhere
where other members of the family can
assist by which I mean in this case
younger other members of the family then
that might be the best place for you to
settle and stay throughout the time that
you're ill and that's all that's
happened in in this case and you are
often part of the question - Jenny so I
was just simply really going to repeat
what I said before I think we have
always said in the guidance what we
don't want to do and it relates to
people being treated in hospital and
staying out of possible as well we don't
want to cause harm through advice which
keeps people at home when
are at risk that doesn't that's not
directly referring to any current issues
it's the clinical and technical advice
which is we want people to come out of
circulation we want them to self isolate
the minute they have symptoms and to
stay out of circulation if there is a
critical issue a safeguarding issue
regardless of whether it's a child an
elderly person or anybody else then
there is there needs to be some sort of
safeguard in place thank you very much
it will turn now to Sam Coates from sky
Sam secretary of state
how can you personally be sure that by
driving halfway across England don't let
Cummings didn't infect anyone else on
the way or while he was there or frankly
do you not think it would have mattered
and what do you say today to all those
people who are unable to say goodbye to
their loved ones or go to their funerals
because they were observing the letter
of the rules seemingly unlike the PM's
top aide and to Jenny Harry's you said
if adults were unable to look after
small children they might resort to
other family members a number 10 to say
that this is an alec analogous to the
situation involving Dominic Cummings but
is it really if one of the two parents
doesn't have coronaviruses the number 10
statement today does seem to suggest how
can you preempt a situation by traveling
halfway across the country in order to
seek further protection would that where
did you say that was that was within the
rules in previous press conferences or
in guidance Sam thanks very much and
look I think for everybody who's lost
loved ones everyone whose hat where
we've everybody has been impacted by
this crisis and everyone has done their
best to try to do the right things the
as I read out before I won't repeat the
guidance again but it does essentially
interpret it as taking practical steps
to ensure that you follow the measures
as best as possible in order to prevent
for example in this case a four-year-old
child from ending up without having the
necessary support that a four-year-old
would quite obviously require and so
that was the decision taken in in that
situation
and look I understand what you're saying
I get what you're saying
you know mr. Cummings is a you know in
the public eye but the reality of the
matter is that a four year old child's
welfare I think is the important thing
parents will ask themselves what they
would do if they had no other support
around and eventually you'd either have
to turn to external support not from
your family you all could try and be
close enough to your family to provide
that that care which is what happened in
this case here and I understand that his
sister and I think a niece who are
younger from the younger generation were
able to provide food and bring things to
the property they were staying in which
was not inside there his parents house
so I think it was a sort of a you know a
straightforward arrangement that meant
he stayed in the same place and
prevented possibility of the child in
this case from not having support around
him and your second point was to Jenny
yeah I reiterate probably what I've just
said which is the public health advice
is take yourself out of society if you
like as soon as you have symptoms stay
at home stay at home with your family I
I don't know the details of this
specific case and I'm commenting on the
the the technical and medical advice
I think the point I haven't got the
detail of the comment from the previous
breast beefing but I think the question
I was asked was if if two adults were
ill and unable to cope or care for a
small child who was totally dependent on
them was that a reason to seek external
support and I would just go back to say
all of the guidance has a common-sense
element to it which includes
safeguarding around adults all children
so I think that would account for that
answer Sam I just want to give a chance
to come back secretary of state can you
just clear up factually what went on so
mr. Cummings went to a Durham property
and he stayed inside back with his wife
and child
all of the same property and members of
their family delivered food to their
doorstep why did that necessitate that
journey 260 miles why couldn't he have
done that in London well I guess it's
where his
family was yes those the facts as I
understand them Sam I guess the simple
answer is that's where the family was
that's where the sister walls and
underneath so you know as we all do in
moments of crisis we always seek to have
our family those who can assist us
around us nothing that's that's I'm
afraid I don't know I don't I'm afraid I
don't know that the personal
circumstances the extent of which
support network could have helped where
but it he clearly went to where the
family was stayed there didn't then move
around and only came back to London for
work which is obviously allowed as one
of the four reasons when fully better
and after the required period of time
thanks very much that can go to a Dave
Wood of ITV Thank You Secretary of State
throughout this lockdown particularly
phase one of it people have been making
some very difficult choices about how
close they get to their family who they
see and where they stay sometimes in the
most heartbreaking of circumstances
should those people have been using
their own interpretation then of the
stay-at-home message thanks David
look I think maybe the reality is that
the people should of course follow the
guidance I I won't bore you by reading
it again but it very clearly says you
should follow the guidance the best of
your ability and and follow the measures
as much as as possible and then it's for
an individual to make the decision how
do I make sure I've got enough support
around the family particularly in the
case that you're referring to with a
potential of both parents ending up
being ill and having a young child to
look after how do you have that support
network around them and the decision
here was to go to that location and stay
in that location they didn't then move
around from there and and so it will be
for each individual to work out the best
way to do that which is what's happened
here can I just check then is is the
message you're giving us this evening
that anyone who becomes ill with this if
they can go close to family no matter
how far that journey is they can do so
that the family members can supply food
and not friends who may live locally
into dr. Harris if I may just remind us
what are the risks of traveling
if you have the virus and would you
recommend it well on the first point of
course the rules have subsequently
changed anyway so you can now travel if
you are not symptomatic any distance in
order to for example exercise and that
is something which people are aware of
now you go as far as if you had the
symptoms could you travel as far as
possible to stay closer to relatives I
mean as already I think already
explained you know you have to get
yourself sort of lock down and do that
in the the best a most practical way and
I think that will be different for
different people under whatever
circumstances they their particular
family differences happen to dictate
that's all that's happened in this case
it was there he stayed there and you
know I don't I can carry on answering it
but it was the same answer each time and
there was a second point - Jenny yes so
I mean the key public health messages
from a professional perspective are if
people have symptoms they should self
isolate immediately and stay in their
homes
the only exception around this is around
risk and that's the issue of
safeguarding for children or adults and
I think I've said that in relation to
the the risk of travel clearly in travel
advice that we're giving if you're in a
private car actually transmission within
it within a vehicle because it's an
enclosed space and you're relatively
close together it's probably a higher
risk one but you're usually within if
you're within a household group then
your exposures are usually the same and
if you travel from A to B and you're not
meeting anybody else then there's no
possibility of a risk passing on so
which is why in much of the guidance
you'll see we say if you're travelling
travel in your own car for people for
example going to have a test taken they
can't go on public transport they go in
a car and that's the simple simple
answer David thank you very much let's
turn now to Chris Hope from De Telegraaf
Chris probably mr. chaps may I ask
quickly you said there that the PM knew
mr. Cummings was staying put
when did the PM know he gone to Durham
and can I ask doctor Harry's
did you know that he gone to Durham and
does mr. Cummings decision to go this
far during lockdown undermine the
stay-at-home message which you're doing
so much to to publicize of course I'm
sorry to disappoint you I don't know
exactly the answer to when the PM knew
but I knew that the I know the PM knew
that he was unwell and that he was
locked down of course the PM was also
unwell during the same period in in
reference I can tell you the PM provides
mr. Cummings with his full support and
mr. Cummings has provided a full
statement and I think it's perfectly
right that questions are asked and
you're all asking the same questions and
what I appreciate about the transports
significant transport announcements the
upgrading of the a66 to dual carriageway
and a billion pounds to make people's
lives better and faster to connect there
and I appreciate that
but you know I do think it's important
to note that questions were asked quite
rightly and the questions been answered
because mr. Cummings has produced a
statement which you will no doubt have
read and I think the second point was so
in the same way that as a doctor I
wouldn't comment on the clinical
position of an individual I have no
detail of in this particular case and
I'm not going to comment on that but in
relation to the advice to the public
absolutely clear that Public Health's
guidance is if you're symptomatic you
stay at home take yourself out of
society as quickly as you can with your
family and stay there unless there is
that extreme risk to life and and that
is a really important message people
have been really good at doing that but
it's vital that we continue to do that
going forward because that's also
underlies the track and trace system as
well and we're going to be asking people
to do that if they're identified as a
contact Chris I can see you waiting to
get back in thank you one final question
can you clarify whether anyone from
Durham Constabulary spoke to any member
mr. Cummings the family please well
quite literally reading from mr.
Cummings statement an open stage was he
or his family spoken to by the police
about this matter I mean the police are
not telling that
and straightforwardly I'm not sure where
the confusion and that comes in but
we've got it in black and white there in
this statement Chris thank you very much
indeed can I turn to David woulding the
Sun on Sunday David we've already had
two resignations from senior aides who
broken the rules in Neil Ferguson and
north of the border
Katherine Calderwood so probably could
be forgiven for thinking there's one
rule and one rule for the rest of them
and even among aids aids maybe thinking
there's one rule for OHS aides but a
different rule for the Downing Street
aides what is what is different about
Dominic Cummings and other people who've
resigned in senior positions David thank
you look I think what most people will
already be thinking watching this is
what would I do in that situation a very
young child my wife is unwell I'm
worried about the ability to support the
child as a father do you then end up
saying well you know we'll take the best
possible option in order to be able to
provide the ongoing care for that child
and therefore go to where there's a
network but not go to inside the the
parents house a house but rely on the
younger generation and that's the that's
obviously the question we'll have to
made draw this distinction this wasn't
sort of visiting a holiday home or going
to visit someone this was to stay put
for 14 days to remain in isolation to
get over what I understand was quite a
significant about illness from
coronavirus and then to be able to
return to London only when well and
properly in line to do a job that
couldn't be done from elsewhere so I
think there's every difference to answer
your question directly on the question
of whether when and whether the Prime
Minister knew about this but I think
that's an important question that needs
answering if you're unable to answer
that then I think the public do have a
right to know what the Prime Minister
knew about mr. Cummings is busy
and when he was told about it yes well
as I said I think the Prime Minister was
in his past with the spirit possibly in
hospital I haven't matched up the exact
dates but I do know that the Prime
Minister knew that he was you know quite
properly staying put in one place with
his family which is the the right thing
to do not leaving after doing that all
the right things to do and as I said a
moment ago the Prime Minister gives mr.
Cummings his full support can I turn to
Matt Mott says tosser Ali Shah please
from GE o news oh I heard of opening up
the relaxing the rules and opening up
the transport network my question is
what measures are being taken to protect
the front line workers and who belong to
ethnic minorities the same communities
who have suffered quite a lot you know
after the covered nineteen out they beat
in the National Health Service or in the
transport network or other essential
services Matassa it's a great question
because you know I'm very concerned to
make sure that the right equipment is
with everybody under the right
circumstances so on the transport
network if you are for example the train
driver and you're in a cab then you know
quite clearly you're not in constant
sort of contact with other people on the
other hand in other forms of transport
buses in some cases for example you
could be in very close contact so it's
what we absolutely have to do is make
sure that we have the right level of
protection for people in different
circumstances and on this subject what
I've done is to write to the transport
operators in hand-in-hand with public
health England to make sure that they
are aware of all the correct equipment
that should be in place procedures
processes things like cordoning off and
also thinking about the flow of
passengers and that type of thing in
order to protect their transport workers
I should say that very sadly 53
transport workers have died during
coronavirus we don't know all of the
circumstances or the rules necessarily
connected to their work but it is you
know of great concern
and it's worth saying that we've asked
professor Fenton to carry out some
research because and I'm very concerned
that people from the bae communities
seem to have been affected more we also
know men are affected more we also know
B city seems to play a part and
professor Fenton's initial report on
this from public health England will be
available I think at the end of this
month
which will be very helpful as well can I
invite you to come back in unless you
don't do you want to come back in again
I think we may have lost the line
what's hazard can you hear us yes did
you want to come back in again yes again
I think you've clearly mentioned it but
also noted is a very concerned within
these communities that are probably you
know within the national service I mean
a lot of people have died and there are
real tragic stories you know people who
get in touch with us from the ethnic
minorities members Indians Pakistanis
Bangladeshis suffered a lot my question
is is government preparing or thinking
of probably maybe announcing some
compensation or maybe some other source
of my year for these families who have
suffered or families were you know the
people who lost their lives and have
left their families in the kind of
situation where it is difficult for them
to make ends meet
yeah it's absolutely I mean it's
heartbreaking to see how this virus
developed and many of the people as you
mention on the front line may come from
ethnic minorities we don't know whether
that's because of the propensity of
people to be on the front line from pame
backgrounds or whether there's something
else happening and that's what Professor
Fenton will help to get to the bottom of
it's certainly the case that in the NHS
and the care world there is a package
that the health secretary announced
previously of support where there is a
deceased member of the family and it's
caught there's also sort of in in work
service
in other circumstances as well though
not in quite the same way and so we are
you know very very concerned about
people from all sorts of different
backgrounds and you will have heard in
the last couple of days that we've also
changed the rules to make sure that
people can have some rights of rights to
stay if a member of their family was
working particularly in the NHS and then
sadly died through coronavirus so that's
sort of mid means of residence for those
individuals and so a range of different
measures absolutely at the forefront of
what the government wants to do to get
to the bottom of this make sure that all
the right lessons are learned and I say
there's some unusual groups including
people from ethnic minorities but also
the way that this has tended to impact
on men people with obesity and other
categories as well and we absolutely get
to the bottom of all of those things
thank you very much I wanted to conclude
by saying them so we've come a very long
way through this disease and we're
taking a whole range of different steps
some of which I was describing from a
transport point of view to try to make
sure that transport can be safe and
secure for people to travel on going
forward that it's absolutely crucial to
remember that the transport system will
not be able to take the normal numbers
of people so please look for
alternatives please consider not
traveling at peak and ideally traveling
by walking cycling or indeed driving
instead finally it's a bank holiday
weekend and so please look after
everybody and stay alert thank you very
much and that's the transport secretary
Grant Shapps brief
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dr. dot UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News